# Dagger Dotnet SDK Module

"Dagger Dotnet SDK", used casually, might either refer to the solution (the collection of projects that collectively are a "kit of software for developing dagger modules in dotnet"), the library (that you import and use as a dotnet module developer), or the SDK module.  From within Dagger Engine, an "SDK" is a _Dagger module_ that acts as the delivery mechanism and interface for SDK functionality.  This directory represents the SDK module for the Dagger Dotnet SDK.

An SDK module must itself use an SDK in order to be a module.  Only Golang is embedded in Dagger itself (all other SDKs ultimately rely on the Golang SDK), so it is conventional for SDK modules to be golang modules.

This module effectively just wraps the CodeGenerator and Thunk programs as Dagger Functions.

## Bootstrapping

As stated repeatedly throughout this project's ADRs, it is an important goal to be as lightweight as ~~possible~~ practical, especially for users of Dotnet modules who are not themselves Dotnet developers.  Thus, it should be capable of operating without pulling in the relatively large Dotnet SDK.  Without the SDK to compile its constituent components like CodeGenerator, Primer, and Thunk, they must be pre-compiled and distributed.

There are four sufficiently idiomatic options for distributing those builds: **Git**, **OCI**, **NuGet**, and **HTTPS**.

Various popular principles (something about kissing and razors) tell us that HTTPS, being the simplest option, is the best option.  All the other options use HTTPS — do they add anything of value for this scenario, to justify their added complexity?  The problem with HTTPS is that there is an asymmetry, and a lack of standardization, around submitting in particular: GitHub artifact API, vs S3 bucket upload, vs SSH transfer...  This makes it difficult to establish a simple pipeline that can be consistent across official, forks (potentially not on GitHub), and local testing.

Although Git is convenient because Dagger contains excellent Git integration, Git is (in theory) technically ill-suited for binary distribution (although it may be interesting to see how it fares against the other options in a real performance test).

NuGet is attractive as the de-facto standard for Dotnet assembly distribution.  It is already necessary to implement a lightweight NuGet client to download module dependencies.  Although, the NuGet client itself would need to be distributed somehow, so there is inevitably a need for two technologies.  It also uses zip compression, which is not the best choice nowadays, includes metadata unnecessary for this purpose, and conventionally puts all target platforms in a single archive.

At a technical level, OCI is more sophisticated, using better compression methods.  As opposed to implementing HTTPS directly, OCI clients like Dagger have already engineered in HTTPS optimizations like parallelism, and choice of various protocol options.  The only reason to not use OCI as a distribution mechanism here would be if doing `sdkRuntimeContainer.WithDirectory("/", distributionContainer.Directory("/"))` causes the payload to be cached twice (once as `distributionContainer`, once as `sdkRuntimeContainer.WithDirectory(...)`, potentially even once again as `distributionContainer.Directory("/")`).  But as long as the "copy" is exactly that, `/` to `/` with no additional parameters, [it should effectively create hard-links instead of copying the files](https://github.com/marcosnils/dagger/blob/ed2603df3b0ba400a4c8a6f55e128945c5a2c300/core/directory.go?plain=1#L585-L614).  Projects like Bazel and Ko have proven out this idea as a good choice by reputable software engineers.

Relying on pre-distributed binaries may seem counter to Dagger conventions, but the TypeScript SDK technically downloads Node JS (or Deno or Bun).  Even so, those are third-party.  There is merit in avoiding reliance on pre-built binaries of previous versions of a software to develop later versions (to an extent - most programming languages eventually cross that line).  A repo should be indefinitely "bootstrappable", possible to build without any of its own artifacts.  Also, and perhaps more importantly, is the need to perform local integration testing, instead of "push and pray" (very important to Dagger in particular).  If the Dagger Dotnet SDK module relies on pulling in pre-built binaries, one way to avoid that is to host a local OCI server, and push the prerequisites to it using a non-dotnet module.  It would be more ideal to skip the server, and (as an alternate execution path to using pre-existing images) build those inline, in the SDK module's own query graph.  However, there's no way to accomplish that without requiring the download of the components' sources even in cases where they aren't going to be used.  SDK-specific decisions about what to download or not, whether to use pre-built or build-from-source, can be made at the absolute earliest in this module's `Codegen` or `ModuleRuntime` functions.  At that point, the decision regarding which files to pull in from the context or not has already been made.  Either the files necessary to compile the components are included in the SDK module or they aren't.  Using a different module for that step doesn't help. because the different module would need to have the source files in its context already, and it would be pulled in unconditionally with the SDK module as is the case for all module dependencies.  Unless, of course, it's a "soft" dependency, conjured up with a `dag.Git(...).Tag(...).Tree().AsModule()`, but at that point there's already a publish-something-to-a-server prerequisite; better to have that deliver the end result, than to deliver something that requires more steps to be usable.  So, in this case, we settle for needing to publish `Primer`, `CodeGenerator`, and `Thunk` to some server (local or not) before `module` is capable of functioning.

## To-do List

- Move to standalone repository or add Excludes to counteract the Go module's "required includes" which cause the hundreds of Dagger engine/cli/etc source files to be included in the module despite not being needed there (or wait for upstream to fix this issue).  See [discussions/9303](https://github.com/dagger/dagger/discussions/9303).
